[Draft] Day 8: “What's wrong with this HTML, and is it valid?” / Patrick Brosset (#200)
matuzo/HTMHell: hell/adventcalendar/2025/8/index.md

date: 2025-12-08
author_links:
  - label: "Site"
    url: "https://patrickbrosset.com"
    link_label: "patrickbrosset.com"
  - label: "Mastodon"
    url: "https://mas.to/@patrickbrosset"
    link_label: "@patrickbrosset@mas.to"
  - label: "Bluesky"
    url: "https://bsky.app/profile/patrickbrosset.com"
    link_label: "@patrickbrosset.com"
intro: "<p>Short introductory text</p>"
image: "advent25_8"
---
Behold this magnificient HTML document:

```html
<html>
  <body marginheight=150 marginwidth=300 bgcolor=black text=white>
    <marquee>
      <b>Hello <i>HTML</b> World!</i>
    </marquee>
```

To try it in your browser, copy the following line and paste it into the address bar:

`data:text/html,<html><body marginheight=150 marginwidth=300 bgcolor=black text=white><marquee><b>Hello <i>HTML</b> World!</i></marquee>`

## What's wrong with it?

Everything? I mean, this HTML looks like it was written in 1998!

Here's what's wrong with it:

1. The document is in _quirks mode_ because it lacks a proper [`DOCTYPE` preamble](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Glossary/Doctype).

>    If you've never heard of quirks mode, then you're probably lucky enough to have started your web development areer after it was an important thing to know about. Suffice to say it's weird. Here are some of the ways quirks mode impacts HTML documents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you've never heard of quirks mode, then you're probably lucky enough to have started your web development career after it was an important thing to know about. Suffice to say it's weird. Here are some of the ways quirks mode impacts HTML documents:
```

>    * The box model behaves differently, which affects layout and spacing.

Reviewer: I'd love to see examples for all of these. These details may not be in the scope of the article but still super interesting. You don't have to add them to the article directly but maybe an example for each in a CodePen?

---
title: "What's wrong with this HTML, and is it valid?"
author: "Patrick Brosset"
author_bio: "I'm in love with the web platform and developer tools. I have been working on browsers for more than 10 years. Currently a product manager on the Edge team at Microsoft, I used to work at Mozilla, and was a web developer before that. I do developer relations, technical documentation, and work on a wide range of web platform technologies and tools. Always happy to chat on social media!"
date: 2025-12-08
author_links:
  - label: "Site"
    url: "https://patrickbrosset.com"
    link_label: "patrickbrosset.com"
  - label: "Mastodon"
    url: "https://mas.to/@patrickbrosset"
    link_label: "@patrickbrosset@mas.to"
  - label: "Bluesky"
    url: "https://bsky.app/profile/patrickbrosset.com"
    link_label: "@patrickbrosset.com"
intro: "<p>Short introductory text</p>"
image: "advent25_8"
---
Behold this magnificient HTML document:

```html
<html>
  <body marginheight=150 marginwidth=300 bgcolor=black text=white>
    <marquee>
      <b>Hello <i>HTML</b> World!</i>
    </marquee>
```

To try it in your browser, copy the following line and paste it into the address bar:

> `data:text/html,<html><body marginheight=150 marginwidth=300 bgcolor=black text=white><marquee><b>Hello <i>HTML</b> World!</i></marquee>`

Reviewer 2: Maybe make this into a code block instead of inline code?

Author: Good idea. I probably will not add a language tag to it. Hope that'll render OK.

Reviewer 2: Unfortunately it did need a language tag when I tried it...

   If you're encountering weird rendering issues that you can't explain, double check that you have a `DOCTYPE` in your HTML document. You can also run the following line of code in the browser console: `document.compatMode`. If it returns `BackCompat`, then you're in quirks mode.

1. The `<head>` tag can definitely be omitted. Neither the [HTML specification](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/semantics.html#the-head-element), nor browser implementations require the tag to be present.

   It's bad for accessibility reasons if you omit it, again because you probably also won't have a `<title>` tag, but it still works.

>    In fact, you can also omit `<html>` and `<body>` tags too. Personally, I commonly use this to quickly test things out in the browser. Instead of creating a new HTML file on my computer, which takes a bit more time, I just type some HTML in the address bar directly. For example: `data:text/html,<div>something`. No `<html>`, no `<head>`, no `<body>` elements.

Reviewer 2: Cool!

   
   Anyway, these presentational attributes act as 0-specificity CSS properties, which means that any CSS property you set in a stylesheet will override them.

1. The `<marquee>` element still animates text in browsers. In fact, if you want to go crazy with it, try nesting two `<marquee>` elements, like this:

   ```html
   <marquee
      direction="down"
      width="200"
      height="200"
      behavior="alternate">
      <marquee behavior="alternate">This text will bounce</marquee>
    </marquee>
   ```

   Take a look at [the example on codepen](https://codepen.io/captainbrosset/pen/dPGvrMQ?editors=1100).

   For an accessible alternative, see Daniela Kubesch's article [Get that marquee ✨AeStHeTiC✨](https://www.htmhell.dev/adventcalendar/2022/15/).

1. Using `<b>` and `<i>` is perfectly valid. They used to be meant for making the text bold and italic, hence their names. But they were deprecated in HTML4, and the meaning of the tags was changed to mean something else. The `<b>` tag now means _bring attention_ and the `<i>` tag now means _idiomatic text_.

>    `<b>` is now used to markup keywords, product names, or other spans of text whose typical presentation would be boldfaced, but not including any special importance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   `<b>` is now used to mark up keywords, product names, or other spans of text whose typical presentation would be boldfaced, but not including any special importance.
```

>    `<i>` is now used to markup text that is set off from the normal prose for readability reasons.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   `<i>` is now used to mark up text that is set off from the normal prose for readability reasons.
```
